# `E3S0.0 - Senses`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, March 2025`

---

### Movement
To begin this journey we gotta pick a dimension to observe, and the computer is _ripe_ with fruit for the picking.
While you might consider the keyboard to be the best input source to start with, I would like to argue why the
_mouse_ is a better choice: the _mouse_ has a constantly _live_ dimension:

_Movement_

The keyboard provides a large number of observable states and nuances - what key is being pressed?  Is it being
held down?  Is the user holding a chord?

Instead, the mouse provides _mathematically simple_ points of analysis - through its X and Y positional values.

With such a data point we can start to build instincts that react _when the mouse moves too fast_ using
some basic math.

The problem is that Go doesn't provide support for getting that kind of information out of the box,
and this project aims to be as _self-sufficient_ as possible.  If this roadblock is already here, then it
_must_ be dealt with now.

Luckily - _Go_ has extremely tight integration with _C!_

I promise to walk you through the process along the way as I build out the `host` module.

### Goals
- It should add as few new types to the ecosystem as possible
- It should expose each sub-system through the it's own well-named package
- It should be host OS _agnostic_ unless the program requires a specific architectural sub-system

### Linux, Darwin, or Windows
At this point we have to make our first fork - some of this code will be untestable, by myself.  I'm currently
building JanOS in a Linux environment, and while I have several Windows machines I don't have a usable Darwin
box.  So, how do we make JanOS host OS agnostic?

By _bridging_ Arwen and her host OS with a set of sensory systems through abstractions.  The models that JanOS
will ultimately yield should be _aware_ of what features they can sense, rather than having them explicitly
hard-coded into their programming.  If a feature is available, those subsystems should _activate_ as available
to the orchestrating entity - which should operate with or without their availability, _gracefully_.

Let's get started =)