# `E3S1.1 - Window Management`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, April 2025`

---

### X11, GLFW, EGL, WGL, CGL, and GL
Let's break down the above acronyms - _GL_ is the open Graphics Library _specification._  That last word is important!
There _technically_ is only a series of specifications from which the lovely folks at the _Khronos Group_ have curated,
which many different individuals have repeatedly experimented with throughout the years.  Isn't that cool!?  That being
said, most of them have a standardized set of libraries that most people utilize for various different features.  In
our case, we are seeking _window management_ - creation, rendering, sizing, and movement.  We have _many_ choices of
window management frameworks, chief of which is the Graphics Library Framework, or _GLFW_.  In my research, getting a
_Hydra_ windowing architecture running on GLFW was fundamentally impossible on _Linux_ specifically.  Instead, that 
required branching to the next option - _EGL_ for Linux, or _WGL_ and _CGL_ for Windows and Darwin. 
 
These libraries, however, are for managing _rendering surfaces_ - not window management, as _GLFW_ includes.  Thus,
this presents a major fork between window management and graphical representation.  As I am developing in a Linux
environment, the documentation will follow along with the _EGL_ implementation.  Don't worry too much about that,
my bridges are _intentionally_ lightweight and easy to replicate.

That leaves us with the last of that daunting list of acronyms - _X11_.  In the world of Linux, _X_ is a de-facto
standard for display and input devices.  In Solution 0 we already touched bases with it in order to grab the mouse cursor
location - here, we'll dig a little further into it.  While I intend to flesh out Windows and Darwin implementations,
they will spiritually follow along with the same general design of the _X11_ implementation I'll focus on here.

### jezek/xgb
I have to give credit where credit is due - and _jezek_ has written a robust and thoroughly well implemented
set of libraries around window management through _X_.  I tested a lot of different libraries and this was
the snappiest and most well thought out I could find - _it just works!_  In addition to that, I can easily
see how to bridge in our physics component later on.  Whenever a third party library is introduced, I will
be sure to include my _reasoning._  We will be utilizing two libraries, specifically - `jezek/xgb` and 
`jezek/xgbutil`

### host.window
As I mentioned in the last step, the ultimate result of this work will reside within `host.window` - in which 
we already included some cross-platform globals.

    // X represents a handle to the underlying x server connection.
    var X *xgbutil.XUtil

    func init() {
        var err error
        fmt.Println("[host] - Linux - sparking X window management")
    
        // Fire up the X server connection
        X, err = xgbutil.NewConn()
        if err != nil {
            panic(err)
        }
    
        // Spark its "main thread"
        go xevent.Main(X)
    
        // Set up a thread to clean it up when JanOS "shuts down"
        go func() {
		    core.WhileAlive()
            xevent.Quit(X)
        }()
    }

This is a typical _initialization spark_ - here, it provides all that is necessary for window creation by
reporting, sparking off several long running Go routines, and watching `core.Alive` to ensure it cleans
itself up whenever a general system-wide "shutdown" is performed.

    // Create sparks a new x window and returns a handle to it
    func Create() *xwindow.Window {
        atomic.AddInt32(&Count, 1)
        handle, err := xwindow.Generate(X)
        if err != nil {
            panic(err)
        }
    
        handle.Create(X.RootWin(), 0, 0, 200, 200, xproto.CwEventMask, xproto.EventMaskNoEvent)
    
        handle.WMGracefulClose(
            func(w *xwindow.Window) {
                xevent.Detach(w.X, w.Id)
                w.Destroy()
                atomic.AddInt32(&Count, -1)
            })
    
        handle.Map()
        return handle
    }

Here is how you create a window and ensure it can _gracefully_ close.  That last part is _crucial_ as I fully
intend to be able to spontaneously spark off and destroy windows _on demand_ in the future, so good memory
management is essential - and that includes properly cleaning up the pointers to C objects, such as our
window handle.

### Example
The example here is _really simple_ - it just creates 7 windows and uses an impulse engine to keep the system
alive.  In the next solution, we'll start to connect it to a rendering context =)

    func main() {
        for i := 0; i < 7; i++ {
            window.Create(std.XY[int]{X: 640, Y: 480}, )
        }
        core.Impulse.StopWhen(window.StopPotential)
        core.Impulse.Spark()
    }