# `E3S2.0 - Rendering`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, April 2025`

---

### Potential Surfaces
Technically, we don't _have_ to render directly to a window!  We could render to _anything,_ including some
kind of buffer in memory that another system uses to build it's own graphics from.  Eventually, I intend to
render directly to the screen without any host windows - but, for now a window is a wonderful target.  The
ability to render to _anything_ in the computer is the foundation of our _Hydra_ windowing architecture - lots 
of graphical pipelines working in parallel to build a beautiful image.  _Because of this,_ I've isolated the 
concept of _rendering_ from the windowing system into a package called `host.graphics` -

    // Renderable represents a type that has a 'Render' method.
    type Renderable interface {
        Render()
    }

    // RenderableWindow represents a renderable window structure.
    type RenderableWindow struct {
        core.Entity
        Renderable
        handle any
    }

Here, you get two useful members.  First is a renderable window entity that has a handle to any kind of
underlying platform-specific window type.  Second is an interface allowing _you_ to create any kind of
renderable structure for use with a renderable surface.  As the project evolves, more surface types
than just a window will be added to the package.

### OpenGL Integration
To integrate with OpenGL, I've turned to the wonderful `go-gl/gl` library.  At it's core, it uses machine
generated bindings to automatically create an Go implementation that mirrors the C specification using a 
package called _Glow._  The project provides a ton of versions of OpenGL, but I've specifically chosen to
use `v3.3-core` - this is for several reasons.  Primarily, Apple devices universally support it - whereas
support beyond `v4.1` was dropped in favor of their own proprietary graphics pipeline called _Metal._  In
addition to this, the foundation of my work relies upon rendering _waveforms_ from the impulse engine - which 
makes more logical sense using _geometry_ shaders as they allow _lines_ in addition to triangles.  While
these were introduced in `v3.2` the design improvements in the `v3.3-core` system justified my final choice.

The beautiful part?  You shouldn't have any additional work to work with this library!  The _only_ note from
the `go-gl` team is that some Linux distributions might require installing the `libgl1-mesa-dev` package.

We are _still_ not quite to GL territory yet, first we need to configure our window to _support_ rendering
using GL.  This, as I mentioned before, is facilitated through _EGL_ - which we will be accessing through
directly calling the C `<EGL/egl.h>` library.

### std.RGBA
The final thing to note before we get started is a new type in the `std` package - `RGBA` - 

    // RGBA is a general structure for holding color values.
    type RGBA struct {
        R float32
        G float32
        B float32
        A float32
    }

This is meant to make it more idiomatic to work with the concept of a set of color values.  It also 
introduces two functions to the `std` package - `RandomRGB()` and `RandomRGBA()` - to generate
random color values, the former of which simply sets the alpha field to 1.0.