# `E3S1.0 - Sparking Hydra`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, April 2025`

---

### Multithreaded Graphical Windows
This particular challenge took a lot of digging into the lower level APIs to figure out, but it
was absolutely worth the effort.  The entire point of this architecture is to _demonstrate_ what
it's capable of - and doing so through numbers in a console isn't exactly _striking._  Instead,
it needs some _pizazz,_ and how better to do that than to render multiple graphical contexts
from the same data source?

My ultimate goal by the end of this enigma is to imbue the windows with both _physics_ and to
also render stats about their unique velocities in real time, all while pointing arrows at each other. 
To accomplish this, I've got a few new concepts I need to introduce to the JanOS ecosystem.  

First is the abstract concept of _Sparking_ -

#### Sparking
Any long running loop that runs in isolation should be _sparked._  This has already been baked into
the impulse engine - it must have `Spark()` called to begin impulses, and that operation can be called
as an asynchronous Go routine.  In a future enigma, the `spark` module will be utilized to orchestrate
these loops.  For this enigma we are going to be _sparking_ off windows that run as completely isolated
systems, yet still can refer to the _world's_ systems.

Next is the concept of a _stopping potential_ -

#### Stop Potentials
To work with such systems, they'll need to coordinate with each other - as such, the most basic form
is to _provide_ a `core.Potential` function signature from which other systems can make intelligent decisions 
off of.  As the majority of these systems will be coordinated by a singular impulse engine, it makes sense that 
it would be used to block operation and decide when to perform system cleanup -

    func main() {
        // Spark off a bunch of systems

        // Set up the stop potential
        core.Impulse.StopWhen(func (ctx core.Context) bool {
            // Intelligently check their states for a stopping condition
        })

        // Block
        core.Impulse.Spark()
    }

This, fundamentally, is the structure that will later drive _Systems_ in the grand E.C.S scheme. In
our current stage, I've created a package in `host` called `window` which contains the following stop
potential -

    // Count provides the number of open windows.
    var Count int32

    // StopPotential provides a potential that returns true when all of the windows have been globally closed.
    func StopPotential(ctx core.Context) bool {
        return Count == 0
    }

#### Initialization
Now that we have several different packages working in tandem - and many of them will start to _spark_ off
long running loops - it's important to give feedback to the engineer of what systems are active in prototyping.
As such, all spiritual "modules" now report their existence information to the console when imported.  This is
useful in knowing _which_ libraries are being used on different host OS architectures, for example.

#### core.WhileAlive()
The final thing to denote is a new function in `core` called `WhileAlive()` -

    package core

    // WhileAlive can be used to hold a main function open.
    func WhileAlive() {
        for Alive {
            // Give the host some breathing room.
            time.Sleep(time.Millisecond)
        }
    }