# `E0S1.1 - Primitive Parity Printing`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, March 2025`

---

### What is this example doing?

Well, simply put: it counts to approximately 20 and tells you the number's parity (_even_ or _odd_).  
In reality, it's doing so much more under the hood to facilitate this.

Let's break it down step by step -

    main() -
	    sys.Impulse.Loop(Hold, when.Always, false)

    ...

    func Hold(ctx core.Context) {
        time.Sleep(time.Second * 5)
    }

The first thing you will find is `sys.Impulse` - the globally available _impulse engine_ for all
JanOS instances.  For now, we will focus entirely around _this_ impulse engine - but, just be aware
that an instance can have as many impulse engines as it likes.  You are _not_ required to utilize
_only_ the global system impulse engine - but _all_ engines are controlled by `core.Alive()`

The hold function simply sleeps, allowing the impulse engine to keep counting up beats.  Since the impulse 
rate is slow, all neural activation would complete before the next impulse - thus, the next beat would always
reset to _0_ _**without**_ this function.

The rest of the above is quite straightforward - we create a _looping neural activation_ that fires 
the `Hold` function whenever it isn't executing.  It accomplishes this through a package called `when` 
which provides some basic helper _potentials_.  This is one of the most _crucial_ concepts of neural 
execution - _every action fires after testing a potential function._

The final parameter is a boolean that indicates if the neuron should be _muted_ upon creation. I'll
expand more on the function of muting later on, for now let's continue to the next two neurons -

    main() -
        core.Impulse.Stimulate(func(ctx core.Context) {
            PrintParity(ctx, "Even")
        }, when.Beat.Even, false)
    
        core.Impulse.Stimulate(func(ctx core.Context) {
            PrintParity(ctx, "Odd")
        }, when.Beat.Odd, false)

    ...

    func PrintParity(ctx core.Context, parity string) {
        fmt.Printf("%d - %v\n", ctx.Beat, parity)
    }

Here is one of the most powerful ways of creating impulsive stimulations - through inline anonymous
functions!  Here, both neurons activate the same underlying function - `PrintParity` - but each
has a different _potential function_ gating its execution.

The next thing you will find is a less common structure called `when.Beat` which provides helper functions
for creating beat oriented potentials.  I say it's less common because _live_ systems typically won't leverage
_beat_ potentials, by design - but _static_ systems do.  A static neural activation is one that uses the
beat value as a form of _incrementing_ through static data - but we don't need to worry much about that right now.

    tl;dr - anonymous functions can be used to inject information into an activation thread

Let's continue -

    main() - 
        sys.Impulse.MaxFrequency = 4.0 //hz

This sets the minimum impulse interval of the engine to `4hz`. The impulse interval can be used 
to directly slow neural activation.  There are two ways you can control the impulse interval - through 
`MaxFrequency`, or through adding synthetic temporal _weight._  The engine's `Resistance` field causes
a blocking activation to sleep for the provided resistance value on every impulse, providing a form of 
temporal regulation by adding _weight_ to the system.  Alternatively, you could add a blocking activation
which simply counts to an extremely large number on every impulse - though this is far more primitive in
design.

	main() -
        core.Impulse.Resistance = time.Second*3

This method, however, _doesn't_ provide any guarantees of frequency!  Instead, it provides a _control
surface_ through which a system can regulate _itself_.  The concept of _control surfaces_ will
echo a lot as we progress into this project - simply put, they provide mechanisms for intra-activation 
control that are unique to each system.  Since resistance is adjustable, neurons can directly regulate 
impulsivity based around context in an intelligent feedback loop.  Every piece of this puzzle has been
_carefully named_ - this is an _entirely abstract_ concept!  Through the use of intentional terminology,
however, others can easily glean the intention.

    tl;dr - using good terminology empowers the next enigmaneer to instinctively know what something does

Lastly we call the most important method of the entire ecosystem -

    // Make it so
    sys.Impulse.Spark()

Simply put, this is what begins neural execution of an impulse engine =)

You can control when an impulse engine _stops_ neural activation by passing a _potential function_ to `engine.StopWhen(...)`