# `E1S0.1 -The Growth Schema`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, May 2025`

---

### Growth Scheme Identification
It would be quite naive of me to think my growth scheme would be the only useful one - or even the most
efficient one!  However, I have _absolutely no idea_ how many future growth schemes humanity will desire
to make.  Once again, we can trust our 'practical infinity' to know it's within 2⁶⁴ variants - but it would
be silly to dedicate 64 bits worth of addressable space at this point.  Thus, we'll leverage our Z.L.E.
scheme to allow growth scheme _identifiers_ to grow at a reasonable rate as a governing entity would throttle
the rate of 'accepted' schemes.

So what _is_ a growth scheme?  Well, it's how you should read the upcoming bits - meaning this project is
defining growth scheme _0,_ while leaving room for other growth schemes with a minimal number of additional
bits.

The timeline of a D.N.A. file is as such:
 
          |             Start         | Pathway | Seed |
          | 1 ┤ Identifier 64-bit ZLE |
          | 0 ┤-----------------------| Pathway | Seed |
            ↑
    Growth Scheme Bit

The file is broken into _three_ regions.  The _Start_ contains a growth scheme bit and, if 1, an identifier value.
The _Pathway_ is a first-in-last-out set of operations that was used to distill the target data down to the resulting
_Seed_ value.

Distill?  Yes - the _imagery_ is what I aim to inspire in your mind - not any currently known mathematical concepts.

This is not something to be studied and learned to infinity, it's meant to accept for its beauty and _simplicity!_

If you wish to object to my use of terminology, you've quite frankly lost the battle with the _point_ =)

### Pathway Step Phrases
The idea of a pathway is simple - it's a set of steps to perform against the data recursively until it grows back
into its original form!  Before I get into the _actual_ steps - we need to pause and consider what the pathway
is doing: it's tracking the _delta_ information necessary to reconstitute each algorithmic step.

The pathway represents a looping phrase that uses a _terminus_ bit to dictate when the pathway region is complete.

    The Pathway Phrase:

      | ...Past Steps |                           Current Step                          | Future Steps... |
      |      ...      | Fuzzy Approximation 5-bit ZLE | Delta 64-bit ZLE | Terminus Bit |       ...       |

The fuzzy approximation _value_ gives us two unique pieces of information - its _bit width_ and its _value._

Using the bit width we can determine the maximum number of times to subdivide an address space, while the value
tells us the _region_ of those subdivisions that the target value exists within at that step in the algorithm.

So, if the target file is 1024 bits long, the desired value exists somewhere between 0 and 2¹⁰²⁴. If we 
_subdivide_ that address space by 2-bits (4) then we essentially 'zoom in' on the quadrant the value exists 
within. We synthesize a value of 2¹⁰²⁴ and then divide it by the bit-width's number of unique addressable values
(a 3-bit note has 8 unique values, for instance), then divide the target value by _that_ number to attain
a _multiplier_ to store as the fuzzy approximation value. The difference between the target and multiplied values 
is kept as the next value to approximate from. 

Because of this algorithm, the larger the data the more resolution we can afford ourselves in the form of our
fuzzy approximation's _bit width._  Using a _micro ZLE_ measurement, our fuzzy range can be 
between 1 and 5 bits wide - but a 5 bit value requires 9 bits to encode, while a 1 bit value only requires 2 bits.
With longer data, however, more resolute approximations have a much greater affect on the overall bit-width delta.

The next part of the phrase is the _Delta ZLE_ - This tells us how many bits the prior action caused the
target value to _shrink_ by.  Since we require knowing the upper limit from which to reference our target value, 
tracking the bit-length delta is extremely important!  This is pretty straight-forward as it simply
stores the number of bits that were truncated off, using up to 64 bits to do so.

Finally, the last part of the pathway step phrase is the _terminus bit._  This simply dictates whether
the next bits are another pathway step, or if they progress into the Seed phrase.

### Seed Values
The remainder of bits left is the final reduced value of the target information.  If you replay the
pathway steps in reverse, the data will be re-synthesized through approximation =)