# `E1S4.1 - Sampling the Mouse`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, March 2025`

---

### Where's the Cursor!?
For our first task, we need to sample some input.  `host` provides an easy (and cross-platform) way to 
just _sample_ the mouse coordinates on demand, but we can grab it in three ways -

    Through a new observer -
        temporal.Observer(core.Impulse, when.Frequency(&mouse.SampleRate), false, mouse.Sample)

    By un-muting the global mouse coordinate observer -
        func init() {
            mouse.Coordinates.Unmute()
        }

    Through a point calculation -
        temporal.Calculation(core.Impulse, when.Frequency(&mouse.SampleRate), false, CalcCoords)
        func CalcCoords(ctx core.Context) std.XY[int] {
            return *mouse.Sample()
        }

All three yield the same result, but the _point calculation_ provides a way to inject some kind of condition
into the observation.  Creating an observational dimension for other dimensions to derive from is perfectly
acceptable, but performing calculations directly is more efficient.  Let's change `CalcCoords` to check if 
the mouse is on the "left" of the screen and print the coordinates out, otherwise do nothing.

    var highestWidth = 0
    func CalcCoords(ctx core.Context) std.XY[int] {
        coords := mouse.Sample()
        if coords.X < highestWidth/2 {
            fmt.Println(coords)
        } else if coords.X > highestWidth {
            highestWidth = coords.X
        }
        return *coords
    }

The above function has a `temporal.PointCalculation` function signature, which just calculates a single
value at any point in time - 

    type PointCalculation[T any] func(core.Context) T

You'll notice I said the "left" of the screen!  Well, we have _no clue_ how "wide" the screen is, so we are
just poking the boundaries of our environment and testing where they lay.  If you launch the program with
your mouse to the left of your screen, it will only print the coordinates when you have hovered back over
a space halfway from the furthest X position you've wandered since it started.

How silly!

But, truly, this is a primitive form of _intelligence!_  The more layers of complexity we stack upon
a system, the more "intelligent" it becomes - _through intelligent design._  The usefulness of such
a silly form of intelligence is questionable, at best, _but it mattered in growing **your** intelligence!_