# `E2S0.0 - Senses`
### `Alex Petz, Ignite Laboratories, March 2025`

---

### Movement
To begin this journey we gotta pick a dimension to observe, and the computer is _ripe_ with fruit for the picking.
While you might consider the keyboard to be the best input source to start with, I would like to argue why the
_mouse_ is a better choice.  First, a dimension can be as complex or simple as possible - the _mouse_ has only
one dimension to observe:

_Movement_

The keyboard provides a large number of observable states and nuances - what key is being pressed?  Is it being
held down?  Is the user holding a chord?

Instead, the mouse provides _mathematically simple_ points of analysis - through its X and Y position values.

With such a data point we can start to build instincts that react _when the mouse moves too fast_ using
some basic math.

The problem is that Go does not natively provide support for getting that kind of information out of the box,
and this project aims to be as _self-sufficient_ as possible.  If this roadblock is already here, then it
_must_ be dealt with now.

Luckily - _Go_ has extremely tight integration with _C!_

I promise to walk you through the process along the way as I build out the `Host` module.

### Goals
- It should add as few new types to the ecosystem as possible
- It should expose basic _I/O functions_ through the `host` namespace
- It should expose senses for _observation_ through the `sense` namespace
- It should expose control surfaces for _actions_ through the `act` namespace
- It should be host OS _agnostic_

### Linux, Darwin, or Windows
At this point we have to make our first fork - some of this code will be untestable, by myself.  I'm currently
building JanOS in a Linux environment, and while I have several Windows machines I don't have a usable Darwin
box.  So, how do we make JanOS host OS agnostic?

By _bridging_ Arwen and her host OS with a set of sensory systems through abstractions.  The models that JanOS
will ultimately yield should be _aware_ of what features they can sense, rather than having them explicitly
hard-coded into their programming.  If a feature is available, those subsystems should _activate_ as available
to the orchestrating entity - which should operate with or without their availability, _gracefully_.

Let's get started =)